Add EIP-3712: Standard for Multiple Types of Fungible-Tokens (#3712)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-3712.md

---

> eip: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eip: 3712
```

> title: ERC Standard for Multiple Types of Fungible-Tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Multiple Fungible Token Standard
```

author: Zhao Li(@1999321)、Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)、Derek Zhou (@zhous)  

> discussions-to:

Reviewer: Will need to add a discussions link (usually on ethereum-magicians.org) before merge.

status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2021-08-01
---

## Simple Summary

A standard that manages multiple types of fungible tokens in a single contract.

## Abstract

> This standard covers some situations that the ERC-20 standard and ERC-1155 standard can hardly handle. It allows multiple types of fungible tokens to be sent to multiple receiving addresses via our proposed interface `transferBatchMul` and allows multip le types of fungible tokens to be sent from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses via our proposed interface `transferFromBatchMul`. This standard greatl y reduces the gas consumption in transactions of multiple types of fungible tokens. In addition the standard allows both setting of an approval for a single token via an interface `approve(uint256 id,address spender, uint256 amount)` and setting of approvals uniformly for all types of  tokens via an interface `approve(address spender,bool _status)`.

Reviewer: Please link to ERCs you're referencing as specified in EIP-1 like this: `[ERC-20](./eip-20.md)`.

Reviewer 2: You may also want to consider reframing your goals. The functions provided in this standard are essentially an extension to 1155 - you are keeping all of 1155's functions, and then adding new functionality on top of it afaict. You could frame this as an extension of 1155, `require` it in the beginning, and significantly simplify the specification and implementation. Would that be in line with your goals for this EIP?

## Motivation

> The ERC-20 token standard defines a single fungible token’s attributes and interfaces. When interacting with multiple types of fungible tokens, multiple token contracts each of which defines a single token need to be developed and deployed. The ERC-1155 token standard combines both fungible tokens and non-fungible tokens but lacks both an interface to set an approval for a spender for an id specified type of fungible token and an interface to set an approval for multiple spenders for an id specified type of fungible token. In addition both the ERC-20 and the ERC-1155 token standards lack interfaces to transact from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses. This proposed standard covers these use cases and allows multiple types of fungible tokens to be transacted from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses.   

Reviewer 2: It might be worth noting that 1155 technically already supports fungible tokens. This may be an incorrect assumption on my part, but I would assume the reason that 1155 never really took off for ERC20-like tokens is due to the difficulty of integrating them on the smart contract/app layer - web3 code assumes that ERC20-like tokens are one to a contract (and therefore do not need a `tokenId` when being referenced), as do Solidity functions integrating with them. For example, Uniswap (to the best of my knowledge) does not have any ability to integrate a token with a `tokenId` into the pool.

As a result, imho it would be hard to see this EIP getting wide traction in the form you intend (not unlike 1155). I don't mean this to be discouraging - I think the functions that you propose are very useful, and in fact know of contracts implementing similar functions for convenience. imho you might want to change the motivation to reflect that.

Reviewer 3: I'm a team member of this EIP. The application goal (www.DAism.io) of this EIP is to build a platform for Ethereum economy, by creating a band new way to issue tokens and a band new decentralized exchange network (we call it IADD), which is obviously a replacement of Uniswap. 
On Nov 13th, 2019,  I wrote an article relating to NFT (https://deme.app/full#12), But I emilinated it from the core of DAism the next year. So we only focus on fungile token now.
It's a very good suggestion to modify the motivation. Thank you very much!

Author: Thank you all for your inputs. Yes what "wschwab" said pretty makes sense. However when utilizing this standard we can handling multiple fungible tokens in a single contract, and it makes transactions of multiple fungible tokens much easier and more gas-efficient. In addition ERC-1155 is more widely used in games while this standard can be more widely used in DeFi. This standard partly inherits some functions in transaction from ERC-1155 but has new functions specifically to handle multipe fungile tokens. ERC-1155 doesn't differentiate fungible tokens from non fungible tokens, doesn't have attributes such as precisions, token name, token symbol to define a fungible token, and doesn't have functions to handle different kinds of approvals for fungible tokens (it only has a function to set a global approval). ERC-1155's overall design is more intended for games. It doesn't cover many use cases such as DeFi in which multiple fungible tokens need to be handled more efficiently. Therefore we come up with our EIP to cover these use cases. We inherit the functions and features of ERC-1155, which apply to fungible tokens and add more attributes such as ID and functions such as different approval functions to better handle multiple fungible tokens in more general use cases. Our proposed EIP is intended for handling multiple fungible tokens in wider scenarios and in a more efficient way.

## Specification

> Interfaces: eip.aol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interfaces: eip.sol
```
?

## Backwards Compatibility

> Our proposed standard strictly adheres to the EIP rules and specifications, therefore our standard is backwork compatible with existing EIPs. 

Reviewer: Please specify if you EIP is backwards compatible with other ERC standards and the Ethereum protocol.

Author: > Please specify if you EIP is backwards compatible with other ERC standards and the Ethereum protocol.

Thank you for your suggestion. I just submitted the changes.

        require(ids.length == amounts.length  && owner.length == amounts.length,"ERC20s: length not equal");
        
        for(uint256 i = 0;i < ids.length;i++){
            require(bytes(allERC20[ids[i]].name).length != 0 || ids[i] == 0,"ERC20s: ERC20 not in use");
            if(amounts[i] == 0){
                continue;
            }
            allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender] = allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender] - amounts[i];
            amounts[i] = allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender];
        }
        
        emit ApproveBatchNoIndexed(ids,owner,spender,amounts);
    }
    
    function createMsg(address _msg,uint256 len) internal view returns(address[] memory data){
        data = new address[](len);
        for(uint256 i = 0;i < len;i++){
            data[i] = _msg;
        }
    }
    
    function _createERC20(uint256 id,string memory name,string memory symbol,uint8 _decimals) internal {
        require(bytes(allERC20[id].name).length == 0,"ERC20s: ERC20 in use");
        allERC20[id].name = name;
        allERC20[id].symbol = symbol;
        allERC20[id].decimals = _decimals;
    }
}
```

> Copyright

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Copyright
```

---
eip: 3712

> title: Multiple Fungible Token Standard

Reviewer 4: There's a (relatively) new preamble section required: [`description`](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1#eip-header-preamble).

```suggestion
title: Multiple Fungible Token Standard
description: standardize single contracts that support multiple fungible tokens
```

> author: Zhao Li(@1999321) 、Derek Zhou (@zhous) 、Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Zhao Li (@1999321), Derek Zhou (@zhous), Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)  
```

Author: Thank you all for your inputs.

> author: Zhao Li (@1999321), Derek Zhou (@zhous), Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Zhao Li (@1999321), Derek Zhou (@zhous), Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)
```

> author: Zhao Li (@1999321), Derek Zhou (@zhous), Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Zhao Li (@1999321), Derek Zhou (@zhous), Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)
```

    
    function transferFromBatchMul(uint256[] memory ids,address[]memory sender,address[]memory recipient,uint256[] memory amounts)external returns(bool);

    function transferFrom(uint256 id,address sender, address recipient, uint256 amount) external returns (bool);

    event Transfer(uint256 id,address indexed from, address indexed to, uint256 value);

    event Approval(uint256 id,address indexed owner, address indexed spender, uint256 value);
    
    event TransferBatch(uint256[] ids,address indexed from,address indexed to,uint256[] value);
    
    event TransferBatchNoIndexed(uint256[] ids,address[] from,address[] to,uint256[] value);
    
    event ApproveBatch(uint256[] ids,address indexed from,address indexed to,uint256[] value);
    
    event ApproveBatchNoIndexed(uint256[] ids,address[] from,address to,uint256[] value);
}
```

Each of the interfaces `totalSupply`,`balanceOf`,`transfer`,`allowance`,`transferFrom`,`approve(uint256 id,address spender, uint256 amount)`  introduces a new parameter id  in the [ERC-20](./eip-20.md)'s corresponding interface's parameter list to specify a fungible token's type. 

> `approve(address spender,bool status)` is similar to [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md)'s interface. I t allows an approval to be set uniformly for all types of tokens.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`approve(address spender,bool status)` is similar to [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md)'s interface. It allows an approval to be set uniformly for all types of tokens.
```

> `transferBatch` and `transferFromBatch` remove the parameter bytes memory data that the [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) standard uses and implement batch transactions.

Reviewer 4: Not a strict requirement, but I think it would be better to define how these functions work without reference to EIP-1155.

Author: thanks for your advice.

        require(ids.length == amounts.length  && owner.length == amounts.length,"ERC20s: length not equal");
        
        for(uint256 i = 0;i < ids.length;i++){
            require(bytes(allERC20[ids[i]].name).length != 0 || ids[i] == 0,"ERC20s: ERC20 not in use");
            if(amounts[i] == 0){
                continue;
            }
            allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender] = allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender] - amounts[i];
            amounts[i] = allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender];
        }
        
        emit ApproveBatchNoIndexed(ids,owner,spender,amounts);
    }
    
    function createMsg(address _msg,uint256 len) internal view returns(address[] memory data){
        data = new address[](len);
        for(uint256 i = 0;i < len;i++){
            data[i] = _msg;
        }
    }
    
    function _createERC20(uint256 id,string memory name,string memory symbol,uint8 _decimals) internal {
        require(bytes(allERC20[id].name).length == 0,"ERC20s: ERC20 in use");
        allERC20[id].name = name;
        allERC20[id].symbol = symbol;
        allERC20[id].decimals = _decimals;
    }
}
```

## Copyright

> Copyright and related rights waived via CC0.

Author: Thank you all for your inputs

---
eip: 3712
title: Standard for Multiple Types of Fungible-Tokens

> description: A standard that manages multiple types of fungible tokens in a single contract.

Reviewer 4: We try to discourage standard (and similar words) in the title and description fields. They tend to show up in every EIP otherwise.

author: Zhao Li (@1999321), Derek Zhou (@zhous), Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-3712-standard-for-multiple-types-of-fungible-tokens/6912
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC

> created: 2021-08-01

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
created: 2021-08-01
requires: 20, 721, 1155
```

## Motivation

The [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token standard defines a single fungible token’s attributes and interfaces. When interacting with multiple types of fungible tokens, multiple token contracts each of which defines a single token need to be developed and deployed. The [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) token standard combines both fungible tokens and non-fungible tokens but lacks both an interface to set an approval for a spender for an id specified type of fungible token and an interface to set an approval for multiple spenders for an id specified type of fungible token. In addition both the [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) and the [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) token standards lack interfaces to transact from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses. This proposed standard covers these use cases and allows multiple types of fungible tokens to be transacted from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses.   

## Specification

Interfaces: eip.sol
```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;
pragma abicoder v2;

> interface IEIP {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
interface IEIP3712 {
```

    
    event TransferBatch(uint256[] ids,address indexed from,address indexed to,uint256[] value);
    
    event TransferBatchNoIndexed(uint256[] ids,address[] from,address[] to,uint256[] value);
    
    event ApproveBatch(uint256[] ids,address indexed from,address indexed to,uint256[] value);
    
    event ApproveBatchNoIndexed(uint256[] ids,address[] from,address to,uint256[] value);
}
```

Each of the interfaces `totalSupply`,`balanceOf`,`transfer`,`allowance`,`transferFrom`,`approve(uint256 id,address spender, uint256 amount)`  introduces a new parameter id  in the [ERC-20](./eip-20.md)'s corresponding interface's parameter list to specify a fungible token's type. 

`approve(address spender,bool status)` is similar to [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md)'s interface. It allows an approval to be set uniformly for all types of tokens.

`transferBatch` and `transferFromBatch` remove the parameter bytes memory data that the [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) standard uses and implement batch transactions.

`transferBatchMul` implements transactions of multiple types of fungible tokens to multiple receiving addresses.

> `transferFromBatchMul` implements transactions of multiple types of fungible tokens from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses.

Reviewer 5: These should ideally be done in NatSpec comments in the interface.

## Rationale

> The [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token standard defines a single fungible token. The [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) token standard defines multiple types of tokens and specifies each token type by using a parameter `id`. By  using this parameter `id`, the [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) token standard greatly reduces the gas consumption in transactions of multiple types of tokens, compared with the [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token standard. Therefore our proposed standard uses a parameter `id` as well to specify a token type in order to reduce the gas consumption for  transactions of multiple types of tokens in one call operation via `transferBatch` or `transferFromBatch`. In our proposed st andard, each type of fungible token is specified by an id, therefore we add an interface `approve(uint256 id,address spender, uint256 amount)` for applications to set an approval for the id specified type of fungible token. In order to set approvals for multiple types of fungible tokens in minimum operations we introduce a function `approve(address spender,bool _status)`  to set approvals uniformly for all types of fungible tokens in one call operation. To handle a transaction of multiple types of fungible tokens from one sending address to multiple receiving addresses we introduce an interface `transferBatchMul` . To handle a transaction of multiple types of fungible tokens from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses we introduce an interface `transferFromBatchMul` .     

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token standard defines a single fungible token. The [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) token standard defines multiple types of tokens and specifies each token type by using a parameter `id`. By using this parameter `id`, the [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) token standard greatly reduces the gas consumption in transactions utilizing multiple distinct types of tokens, when compared with the [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token standard. Our proposed standard likewise uses an `id` parameter.  In our proposed standard, since each type of fungible token is specified by an id, we add a function `approve(uint256 id, address spender, uint256 amount)` for applications to set an approval for the specified token type. In order to set approvals for all types of fungible tokens simultaneously, we introduce a function `approve(address spender, bool _status)`  to set approvals uniformly for all types of fungible tokens in a single call. To handle a transaction of multiple types of fungible tokens from one sending address to multiple receiving addresses we introduce an interface `transferBatchMul`. Finally, to handle a transaction of multiple types of fungible tokens from multiple sending addresses to multiple receiving addresses we introduce an interface `transferFromBatchMul`.     
```

## Backwards Compatibility

> Our proposed standard strictly adheres to the EIP rules and specifications, therefore our standard is backwork compatible with existing EIPs. Part of the transfer function is compatible with [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) but not [ERC-20](./eip-20.md).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This EIP is partially backwards compatible with [EIP-1155](./eip-1155.md), but is NOT compatible with [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) or [EIP-20](./eip-20.md).
```

I suggest adding that it is not compatible with EIP-721 because it is also a commonly-used token standard (despite being a subset of EIP-1155).

## Reference Implementation

Example implementation of a signing contract:
```solidity

pragma solidity ^0.8.0;
pragma abicoder v2;

> import "./eip.sol";

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Not sure where this came from

        require(ids.length == amounts.length  && owner.length == amounts.length,"ERC20s: length not equal");
        
        for(uint256 i = 0;i < ids.length;i++){
            require(bytes(allERC20[ids[i]].name).length != 0 || ids[i] == 0,"ERC20s: ERC20 not in use");
            if(amounts[i] == 0){
                continue;
            }
            allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender] = allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender] - amounts[i];
            amounts[i] = allERC20[ids[i]].allowances[owner[i]][spender];
        }
        
        emit ApproveBatchNoIndexed(ids,owner,spender,amounts);
    }
    
    function createMsg(address _msg,uint256 len) internal view returns(address[] memory data){
        data = new address[](len);
        for(uint256 i = 0;i < len;i++){
            data[i] = _msg;
        }
    }
    
    function _createERC20(uint256 id,string memory name,string memory symbol,uint8 _decimals) internal {
        require(bytes(allERC20[id].name).length == 0,"ERC20s: ERC20 in use");
        allERC20[id].name = name;
        allERC20[id].symbol = symbol;
        allERC20[id].decimals = _decimals;
    }
}
```

> 

Reviewer 4: The only blocker that I see left to get this merged is that the `Security Considerations` section is missing and is not optional.

## Copyright

> Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
```

---
eip: 3712
title: Multiple Fungible Token Standard
author: Zhao Li(@1999321)、Yuefei Tan (@whtyfhas)、Derek Zhou (@zhous)  
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-3712-standard-for-multiple-types-of-fungible-tokens/6912
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2021-08-01
---

> ## Simple Summary

Reviewer: We recently deprecated the "Simple Summary" in favor of a description field in the preamble. Please see the [EIP template ](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/eip-template.md)for an example.
